README.md, before:

# Cardano IBC Incubator
This project is working towards a bridge implementation to allow exchange of information from a Cardano blockchain to Cosmos SDK based blockchains.

It follows the [inter-blockchain communication protocol](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc) and is trying to achieve full compliance with the parts of the specification identified necessary for the developed framework.

> [!CAUTION]
> *Disclaimer*
>
> Please be aware that this is an incubator project and by this means it is neither complete nor sufficiently tested at the current point in time to be used for production grade operation of a bridge. So the use of the source code and software artifacts in this repository are subject to your own discretion and risk.
>
>  :heavy_exclamation_mark: The software withing this repository is provided to you on an "as is" and "as available" basis.
>
> While we strive for high functionality and user satisfaction and endeavour to maintain reliability and accuracy, unforeseen issues may arise due to the experimental nature of this project.

## :eyes: Overview
This repository is divided into four main directories:
- `cardano`: Contains all Cardano related source code that are part of the bridge as well as some facilities for bringing up a local Cardano blockchain for test and development purposes. It also contains the Aiken based Tendermint Light Client and IBC primitives implementation.
- `cosmos`: Contains all Cosmos SDK related source code including the Cardano light client (or thin client) implementation running on the Cosmos chain. The folder was scaffolded via [Ignite CLI](https://docs.ignite.com/) with [Cosmos SDK 0.50](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk).
- `relayer`: Contains all relayer related source code. Forked from https://github.com/cosmos/relayer
- `caribic`: A command-line tool responsible for starting and stopping all services, as well as providing a simple interface for users to interact with and configure the bridge services.

## :rocket: Getting Started

### 🧰 Prerequisites

The following components are required to run the project:

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Aiken](https://aiken-lang.org/installation-instructions)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) `>= v20.0.0`
- [deno](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/manual/getting_started/installation)
- [golang](https://golang.org/doc/install)
- [Rust & Cargo](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)

#### Verify Prerequisites

To check if you have all the necessary prerequisites installed:

```sh
cd caribic
cargo run check
```

### ⛓ Running a local Cardano network

To start the Cardano node, Mithril, Ogmios, and Kupo and db-sync locally run:

```sh
cd caribic
cargo run start network 
# "cargo run start" without argument 
# will start network and bridge components
```

### 🌉 Deploying the bridge components

To start the gateway, relayer and to deploy the light client contracts run:

```sh
cargo run start bridge
# "cargo run start" without argument 
# will start network and bridge components
```

### ⛓️‍💥 Stopping the services

To stop the services:

```sh
cargo run stop # network|bridge|demo|all (default: all)
```

### 🎉 Demo: Sending a demo message from Cosmos to Cardano

Make sure you have the bridge and network components running. Then, run the following command:

```sh
cargo run demo message-exchange
```

To demonstrate the ability to exchange messages, a small [vessel demo use case](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/cardano-ibc-summit-demo) is included in the deployment.  
It simulates vessels sending their positions and requesting a harbor in a trustless and decentralized way using a scaffolded Cosmos app-chain. The data is consolidated and cleaned on the Cosmos side and sent out as an IBC packet. This packet is picked up by a relayer and written to the Cardano blockchain, acting as an oracle.

You can run the demo use case by following these steps:

- Follow the steps above to run a local Cardano network and the bridge components.
- Make sure you see a message like `successfully created channel` in the logs of the relayer container.
- Get the IBC (vessel-sidechain) channel ID (e.g., `channel-0`).
- Enter the vessel use case production container and run:

```zsh
go mod tidy
go run . report -simulate
go run . consolidate
```

Search in the container logs for the last message beginning with "Consolidate". Copy the timestamp, as you will need it for the next command:

```zsh
go run . transmit -channelid $CHANNEL_ID -ts $CONSOLIDATION_TIMESTAMP
```

- Check in the relayer or gateway if the message has been picked up and delivered to Cardano. Usually it should invoke the recvPacket function. This function would also be able to handle business logic.

## 🎉 Demo: Transfering tokens from Cosmos to Cardano and vice versa

> [!CAUTION]  
> 🪡 Use case under construction:  
> We are currently refactoring the code, so this use case might not work properly.

Make sure you have the bridge and network components running. Then, run the following command:

```sh
cargo run demo token-swap
```

```sh
docker exec -it relayer sh # Access to relayer container
cd /root && ./scripts/xtransfer.sh # Start submit transfer packet
```

After running `xtransfer.sh`, the relayer will capture the packet, relay a message to Cardano, call Ack on Cosmos, and by that complete the cycle.

```sh
2024-03-04T09:26:53.779140Z	info	Successful transaction	{"provider_type": "cardano", "chain_id": "cardano", "gas_used": 0, "height": 0, "msg_types": ["/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgRecvPacket"], "tx_hash": "a35bc010a9e5e78c88469707aa10c3501bf19e51e0539b4720d70479d44fc3bc"}
...
2024-03-04T09:27:01.748158Z	info	Successful transaction	{"provider_type": "cosmos", "chain_id": "sidechain", "packet_src_channel": "channel-7", "packet_dst_channel": "channel-7", "gas_used": 55261, "fees": "", "fee_payer": "cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6", "height": 8573, "msg_types": ["/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgAcknowledgement"], "tx_hash": "D162CC2356A09F09C80D616987FE4BE965FDEA7C3C93AC0F2D1D5BE4589C8A46"}
```

You can query balance using this endpoint:
#### Query balance on Cosmos:
```sh
http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6
```
Notice that you will have voucher token with prefix: "ibc/"
Example:
```json
{
  "balances": [
    {
      "denom": "ibc/018463FA736C852FA78B23CE6CAE123B9182D18658E0F323B130BB4B1FBB6A52",
      "amount": "13578"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Query balance on Cardano:
```sh
http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first
```
Notice that you will have UTXO, asset with amount 2000:
Example:
```json
[
  {
    "transaction_index": 0,
    "transaction_id": "4ceee14cffdf8a03bba53e058bc02f0ed5e3cc1169d1e45963c02b780694b1af",
    "output_index": 2,
    "address": "addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql",
    "value": {
      "coins": 1150770,
      "assets": {
        "901a270744d7eee7a2ef5e0199a29ca2636b3ede7e6fa520aba1a1c1.84916548b2860f827f717b20796c9ddd4742325677e9534cd5e92c8ca260c553": 2000
      }
    },
    "datum_hash": null,
    "script_hash": null,
    "created_at": {
      "slot_no": 4202,
      "header_hash": "3d2e1690468685cf5c95364b7200812f7252994d6a9620be0cc1f74991656020"
    },
    "spent_at": null
  }
]
```

### 🎉 Demo: Crosschain Swap

> [!CAUTION]  
> 🪡 Use case under construction:  
> We are currently refactoring the code, so this use case might not work properly.

1. Run:
  ```sh
  chains/osmosis/osmosis/scripts/setup_crosschain_swaps.sh
  ```
  to transfer Cardano mock token to Osmosis via IBC, create swap pool with this token and deploy contracts relates to crosschain swap. 

2. Copy address of `crosschain_swaps` contract in result of the previous command to variable `CROSSCHAIN_SWAPS_ADDRESS` of file `swap.sh`.

3. Run:
  ```sh
  swap.sh
  ```
  This command will send mock token in Cardano to Osmosis via IBC Packet Forward Middleware, swap this token to `uosmo` on created pool and send swapped token back to Cardano via Packet Forward Middleware again.


## 💡 Useful commands for local networks

#### Using the faucet to create and fund accounts in the test environment

Sidechain:
```sh
curl -X POST "http://localhost:4500/" -H  "accept: application/json" -H  "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{  \"address\": \"cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6\",  \"coins\": [    \"10token\",\"10stake\"  ]}"
```

or access to `http://localhost:4500`

To seed the Cardano addresses, you can use the `config.json` file generated by `caribic`. This file will be created the first time you run `caribic`. By default, it can be found at `<USER_HOME>/.caribic/config.json`.


#### Register a new stake pool on the local Cardano blockchain
```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./regis-spo.sh <name>
```

Example:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./regis-spo.sh alice
```

#### Retire a stake pool on the local Cardano blockchain
This will sent a tx to retire your pool in the next epoch:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./deregis-spo.sh <name>
```

Example:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./deregis-spo.sh alice
```

#### Register a validator on Cosmos
This script will connect to your current docker and regis a new validator

```sh
Run this to check we only have 1 validator: curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"

Run this to regis new validator: cd cosmos/scripts/ && ./regis-spo.sh

Run this to check we now have 2 validators: curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"

```

#### Unregister a validator on Cosmos
Stop the running script above, then wait for about 100 blocks (~2 mins), then check we only have 1 validator:

```sh
curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"
```

#### Test timeout packet
After successful create clients, connections, channels, terminate that terminal(A).

```sh
Access this url to check current balance in Cardano: http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first

Access this url to check current balance in Cosmos: http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6

```
Update script `/scripts/xtransfer.sh`, `timeout-time-offset` from `1h` to `10s`

Open another terminal(B) and run:
```sh
docker exec -it relayer sh
cd /root && ./scripts/xtransfer.sh
```

Recheck you current balance, notice that your balance will be deduct.
```sh
Access this url to check current balance in Cardano: http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first

Access this url to check current balance in Cosmos: http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6

```

In the terminal A, run this to execute timeout
```sh
cd /root && ./bin/rly start demo --processor legacy
```

After seeing something like `/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgTimeout`, recheck you current balance, notice that your token will be return back.

## Additional Resources

- [ELI5: What is IBC?](https://medium.com/the-interchain-foundation/eli5-what-is-ibc-def44d7b5b4c)
- [IBC-Go Documentation](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/)
- [ICS 20: The Transfer Module](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/apps/transfer/overview/)

## 🫂 Kudos to the Developers in the Cardano Ecosystem

This project stands on the shoulders of some incredible frameworks and tools developed by the Cardano community. Huge thanks to the developers behind these services—projects like this wouldn’t be possible without their hard work and innovation:

- [Lucid Evolution](https://github.com/Anastasia-Labs/lucid-evolution)
- [Ogmios](https://github.com/cardanosolutions/ogmios)
- [Kupo](https://github.com/cardanosolutions/kupo)
- [Apollo](https://github.com/Salvionied/apollo)
- [gOuroboros](https://github.com/blinklabs-io/gouroboros)
- [Mithril](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril)

## :blue_heart: Contributing
All contributions are welcome! Please feel free to open a new thread on the issue tracker or submit a new pull request.

Please read [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) in advance. Thank you for contributing!

## :books: Additional Documents
- [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
- [Security](SECURITY.md)

Commit message:

add troubleshooting section for cardano node diffusion error with network socket binding, providing link to community forum discussion and colima configuration guidance

README.md, after:

# Cardano IBC Incubator
This project is working towards a bridge implementation to allow exchange of information from a Cardano blockchain to Cosmos SDK based blockchains.

It follows the [inter-blockchain communication protocol](https://github.com/cosmos/ibc) and is trying to achieve full compliance with the parts of the specification identified necessary for the developed framework.

> [!CAUTION]
> *Disclaimer*
>
> Please be aware that this is an incubator project and by this means it is neither complete nor sufficiently tested at the current point in time to be used for production grade operation of a bridge. So the use of the source code and software artifacts in this repository are subject to your own discretion and risk.
>
>  :heavy_exclamation_mark: The software withing this repository is provided to you on an "as is" and "as available" basis.
>
> While we strive for high functionality and user satisfaction and endeavour to maintain reliability and accuracy, unforeseen issues may arise due to the experimental nature of this project.

## :eyes: Overview
This repository is divided into four main directories:
- `cardano`: Contains all Cardano related source code that are part of the bridge as well as some facilities for bringing up a local Cardano blockchain for test and development purposes. It also contains the Aiken based Tendermint Light Client and IBC primitives implementation.
- `cosmos`: Contains all Cosmos SDK related source code including the Cardano light client (or thin client) implementation running on the Cosmos chain. The folder was scaffolded via [Ignite CLI](https://docs.ignite.com/) with [Cosmos SDK 0.50](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk).
- `relayer`: Contains all relayer related source code. Forked from https://github.com/cosmos/relayer
- `caribic`: A command-line tool responsible for starting and stopping all services, as well as providing a simple interface for users to interact with and configure the bridge services.

## :rocket: Getting Started

### 🧰 Prerequisites

The following components are required to run the project:

- [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-docker/)
- [Aiken](https://aiken-lang.org/installation-instructions)
- [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) `>= v20.0.0`
- [deno](https://docs.deno.com/runtime/manual/getting_started/installation)
- [golang](https://golang.org/doc/install)
- [Rust & Cargo](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install)

#### Verify Prerequisites

To check if you have all the necessary prerequisites installed:

```sh
cd caribic
cargo run check
```

### ⛓ Running a local Cardano network

To start the Cardano node, Mithril, Ogmios, and Kupo and db-sync locally run:

```sh
cd caribic
cargo run start network 
# "cargo run start" without argument 
# will start network and bridge components
```

### 🌉 Deploying the bridge components

To start the gateway, relayer and to deploy the light client contracts run:

```sh
cargo run start bridge
# "cargo run start" without argument 
# will start network and bridge components
```

### ⛓️‍💥 Stopping the services

To stop the services:

```sh
cargo run stop # network|bridge|demo|all (default: all)
```

### 🎉 Demo: Sending a demo message from Cosmos to Cardano

Make sure you have the bridge and network components running. Then, run the following command:

```sh
cargo run demo message-exchange
```

To demonstrate the ability to exchange messages, a small [vessel demo use case](https://github.com/cardano-foundation/cardano-ibc-summit-demo) is included in the deployment.  
It simulates vessels sending their positions and requesting a harbor in a trustless and decentralized way using a scaffolded Cosmos app-chain. The data is consolidated and cleaned on the Cosmos side and sent out as an IBC packet. This packet is picked up by a relayer and written to the Cardano blockchain, acting as an oracle.

You can run the demo use case by following these steps:

- Follow the steps above to run a local Cardano network and the bridge components.
- Make sure you see a message like `successfully created channel` in the logs of the relayer container.
- Get the IBC (vessel-sidechain) channel ID (e.g., `channel-0`).
- Enter the vessel use case production container and run:

```zsh
go mod tidy
go run . report -simulate
go run . consolidate
```

Search in the container logs for the last message beginning with "Consolidate". Copy the timestamp, as you will need it for the next command:

```zsh
go run . transmit -channelid $CHANNEL_ID -ts $CONSOLIDATION_TIMESTAMP
```

- Check in the relayer or gateway if the message has been picked up and delivered to Cardano. Usually it should invoke the recvPacket function. This function would also be able to handle business logic.

## 🎉 Demo: Transfering tokens from Cosmos to Cardano and vice versa

> [!CAUTION]  
> 🪡 Use case under construction:  
> We are currently refactoring the code, so this use case might not work properly.

Make sure you have the bridge and network components running. Then, run the following command:

```sh
cargo run demo token-swap
```

```sh
docker exec -it relayer sh # Access to relayer container
cd /root && ./scripts/xtransfer.sh # Start submit transfer packet
```

After running `xtransfer.sh`, the relayer will capture the packet, relay a message to Cardano, call Ack on Cosmos, and by that complete the cycle.

```sh
2024-03-04T09:26:53.779140Z	info	Successful transaction	{"provider_type": "cardano", "chain_id": "cardano", "gas_used": 0, "height": 0, "msg_types": ["/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgRecvPacket"], "tx_hash": "a35bc010a9e5e78c88469707aa10c3501bf19e51e0539b4720d70479d44fc3bc"}
...
2024-03-04T09:27:01.748158Z	info	Successful transaction	{"provider_type": "cosmos", "chain_id": "sidechain", "packet_src_channel": "channel-7", "packet_dst_channel": "channel-7", "gas_used": 55261, "fees": "", "fee_payer": "cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6", "height": 8573, "msg_types": ["/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgAcknowledgement"], "tx_hash": "D162CC2356A09F09C80D616987FE4BE965FDEA7C3C93AC0F2D1D5BE4589C8A46"}
```

You can query balance using this endpoint:
#### Query balance on Cosmos:
```sh
http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6
```
Notice that you will have voucher token with prefix: "ibc/"
Example:
```json
{
  "balances": [
    {
      "denom": "ibc/018463FA736C852FA78B23CE6CAE123B9182D18658E0F323B130BB4B1FBB6A52",
      "amount": "13578"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Query balance on Cardano:
```sh
http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first
```
Notice that you will have UTXO, asset with amount 2000:
Example:
```json
[
  {
    "transaction_index": 0,
    "transaction_id": "4ceee14cffdf8a03bba53e058bc02f0ed5e3cc1169d1e45963c02b780694b1af",
    "output_index": 2,
    "address": "addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql",
    "value": {
      "coins": 1150770,
      "assets": {
        "901a270744d7eee7a2ef5e0199a29ca2636b3ede7e6fa520aba1a1c1.84916548b2860f827f717b20796c9ddd4742325677e9534cd5e92c8ca260c553": 2000
      }
    },
    "datum_hash": null,
    "script_hash": null,
    "created_at": {
      "slot_no": 4202,
      "header_hash": "3d2e1690468685cf5c95364b7200812f7252994d6a9620be0cc1f74991656020"
    },
    "spent_at": null
  }
]
```

### 🎉 Demo: Crosschain Swap

> [!CAUTION]  
> 🪡 Use case under construction:  
> We are currently refactoring the code, so this use case might not work properly.

1. Run:
  ```sh
  chains/osmosis/osmosis/scripts/setup_crosschain_swaps.sh
  ```
  to transfer Cardano mock token to Osmosis via IBC, create swap pool with this token and deploy contracts relates to crosschain swap. 

2. Copy address of `crosschain_swaps` contract in result of the previous command to variable `CROSSCHAIN_SWAPS_ADDRESS` of file `swap.sh`.

3. Run:
  ```sh
  swap.sh
  ```
  This command will send mock token in Cardano to Osmosis via IBC Packet Forward Middleware, swap this token to `uosmo` on created pool and send swapped token back to Cardano via Packet Forward Middleware again.


## 💡 Useful commands for local networks

#### Using the faucet to create and fund accounts in the test environment

Sidechain:
```sh
curl -X POST "http://localhost:4500/" -H  "accept: application/json" -H  "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{  \"address\": \"cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6\",  \"coins\": [    \"10token\",\"10stake\"  ]}"
```

or access to `http://localhost:4500`

To seed the Cardano addresses, you can use the `config.json` file generated by `caribic`. This file will be created the first time you run `caribic`. By default, it can be found at `<USER_HOME>/.caribic/config.json`.


#### Register a new stake pool on the local Cardano blockchain
```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./regis-spo.sh <name>
```

Example:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./regis-spo.sh alice
```

#### Retire a stake pool on the local Cardano blockchain
This will sent a tx to retire your pool in the next epoch:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./deregis-spo.sh <name>
```

Example:

```sh
cd cardano/chains && ./deregis-spo.sh alice
```

#### Register a validator on Cosmos
This script will connect to your current docker and regis a new validator

```sh
Run this to check we only have 1 validator: curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"

Run this to regis new validator: cd cosmos/scripts/ && ./regis-spo.sh

Run this to check we now have 2 validators: curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"

```

#### Unregister a validator on Cosmos
Stop the running script above, then wait for about 100 blocks (~2 mins), then check we only have 1 validator:

```sh
curl -X GET "http://localhost:1317/cosmos/base/tendermint/v1beta1/validatorsets/latest" -H  "accept: application/json"
```

#### Test timeout packet
After successful create clients, connections, channels, terminate that terminal(A).

```sh
Access this url to check current balance in Cardano: http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first

Access this url to check current balance in Cosmos: http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6

```
Update script `/scripts/xtransfer.sh`, `timeout-time-offset` from `1h` to `10s`

Open another terminal(B) and run:
```sh
docker exec -it relayer sh
cd /root && ./scripts/xtransfer.sh
```

Recheck you current balance, notice that your balance will be deduct.
```sh
Access this url to check current balance in Cardano: http://localhost:1442/matches/addr_test1vqj82u9chf7uwf0flum7jatms9ytf4dpyk2cakkzl4zp0wqgsqnql?unspent&order=most_recent_first

Access this url to check current balance in Cosmos: http://localhost:1317/cosmos/bank/v1beta1/balances/cosmos1ycel53a5d9xk89q3vdr7vm839t2vwl08pl6zk6

```

In the terminal A, run this to execute timeout
```sh
cd /root && ./bin/rly start demo --processor legacy
```

After seeing something like `/ibc.core.channel.v1.MsgTimeout`, recheck you current balance, notice that your token will be return back.

## Additional Resources

- [ELI5: What is IBC?](https://medium.com/the-interchain-foundation/eli5-what-is-ibc-def44d7b5b4c)
- [IBC-Go Documentation](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/)
- [ICS 20: The Transfer Module](https://ibc.cosmos.network/v8/apps/transfer/overview/)

## Troubleshooting

### Cardano Node DiffusionError: Network.Socket.bind permission denied

If you encounter an error like `DiffusionError Network.Socket.bind: permission denied (Operation not permitted)` when starting the Cardano node, see the [Cardano Forum thread on this issue](https://forum.cardano.org/t/first-time-starting-a-node-diffusionerrored/63585).

If this doesn't resolve the issue, this is typically related to Docker runtime configuration. If using Colima on macOS, ensure you're using VirtioFS mount type by recreating Colima with `colima delete` followed by `colima start --vm-type=vz --mount-type=virtiofs --network-address`, and verify the cardano-node is configured to bind to `0.0.0.0` rather than a specific IP address.

## 🫂 Kudos to the Developers in the Cardano Ecosystem

This project stands on the shoulders of some incredible frameworks and tools developed by the Cardano community. Huge thanks to the developers behind these services—projects like this wouldn’t be possible without their hard work and innovation:

- [Lucid Evolution](https://github.com/Anastasia-Labs/lucid-evolution)
- [Ogmios](https://github.com/cardanosolutions/ogmios)
- [Kupo](https://github.com/cardanosolutions/kupo)
- [Apollo](https://github.com/Salvionied/apollo)
- [gOuroboros](https://github.com/blinklabs-io/gouroboros)
- [Mithril](https://github.com/input-output-hk/mithril)

## :blue_heart: Contributing
All contributions are welcome! Please feel free to open a new thread on the issue tracker or submit a new pull request.

Please read [Contributing](CONTRIBUTING.md) in advance. Thank you for contributing!

## :books: Additional Documents
- [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md)
- [Security](SECURITY.md)
