caribic/README.md, before:

# Caribic

`caribic` is a local CLI used to bootstrap, run, and validate the Cardano <-> IBC bridge demo environment in this repo. For those familiar with Hermes, caribic cli also wraps that interface with equivalent commands that allow manual interaction with the relayer. The expected workflow is that keys would be addded to hermes via caribic, i.e, either you can enter via I/O when prompted, or refer to a mnemonic file as prompted, but there is no need to manually configure hermes. 

## Build and run

From `cardano-ibc-incubator/caribic`:

```bash
cargo install --path .
```
## Commands overview

### `caribic check`

Verifies prerequisites are available (Docker, Aiken, Deno, Go).

### `caribic install`

Installs missing prerequisites on macOS and Ubuntu Linux.

```bash
caribic install
```

### `caribic start [target]`

Starts services. Run `caribic --help` to see an actively maintained exhaustive list of targets and commands.

Examples:

```bash
caribic start
caribic start --clean --with-mithril
caribic start bridge
caribic start cosmos --clean
caribic start osmosis
caribic start injective --network local
caribic start injective --network testnet
```

Injective startup note:
- `caribic start injective --network local` starts a local single-node Injective devnet.
- `caribic start injective --network testnet` starts a local `injectived` process that state-syncs from public testnet RPC.
- `caribic start injective --network mainnet` is intentionally not implemented yet.
- If `injectived` is missing, caribic prompts to install it from source (`InjectiveFoundation/injective-core`) and runs `make install`.

Cosmos startup note:
- `caribic start cosmos` sets `IGNITE_SKIP_PROTO=1` by default in the container startup path to avoid Ignite regenerating OpenAPI/proto artifacts on every boot.
- If you intentionally need Ignite proto regeneration, run with `IGNITE_SKIP_PROTO=0 caribic start cosmos --clean`.

Hermes config note:
- Hermes reads `~/.hermes/config.toml` when the process starts. Editing that file while Hermes is already running does not apply live.
- If you change Hermes config manually, restart Hermes (`caribic stop relayer` then `caribic start relayer`).
- `caribic` writes Hermes config during setup and, for `caribic demo token-swap`, augments it with the `localosmosis` chain block before Hermes is used for channel creation.

### `caribic stop [target]`

Stops services. With no target, it behaves like `all`.

- **Targets**: `all`, `network`, `bridge`, `cosmos`, `osmosis`, `injective`, `demo`, `gateway`, `relayer`, `mithril`

Examples:

```bash
caribic stop
caribic stop bridge
caribic stop osmosis
caribic stop injective --network local
caribic stop injective --network testnet
```

### `caribic health-check [--service <name>]`

Checks whether key services appear to be up (gateway, cardano, postgres, kupo, ogmios, hermes, mithril, cosmos, osmosis, redis, plus optional chain adapter checks such as Injective). Use this before running tests if you are unsure about your current state.

```bash
caribic health-check
caribic health-check --service gateway
```

### `caribic audit`

Runs three checks and reports a single pass or fail summary:
- `npm audit` in `cardano/gateway`
- `cargo audit` in `caribic`
- `aiken check` in `cardano/onchain`

### `caribic keys <add|list|delete>`

Convenience wrapper around Hermes keyring operations.

```bash
caribic keys list
caribic keys add --chain entrypoint --mnemonic-file ./my-mnemonic.txt --overwrite
caribic keys delete --chain entrypoint --key-name relayer
```

### `caribic create-client`, `caribic create-connection`, `caribic create-channel`

Thin wrappers that run the corresponding Hermes IBC actions using the local Hermes binary/config.

```bash
caribic create-client --host-chain cardano-devnet --reference-chain entrypoint
caribic create-connection --a-chain cardano-devnet --b-chain entrypoint
caribic create-channel --a-chain cardano-devnet --b-chain entrypoint --a-port transfer --b-port transfer
```

### `caribic demo <message-exchange|token-swap>`

Starts a demo setup step on top of already running services.
`caribic demo token-swap` accepts optional chain/network selection:

```bash
caribic demo token-swap --chain osmosis --network local
caribic demo token-swap --chain osmosis --network testnet
caribic demo token-swap --chain injective --network testnet
```

Currently implemented token-swap path:
- `--chain osmosis --network local`

Other chain/network combinations are parsed and validated but return a clear "not implemented" error for now.

The implemented Osmosis local flow expects `caribic start --with-mithril` and `caribic start osmosis` to have already been run. It then validates required services, prepares Hermes channels, deploys the cross-chain swap contracts, and executes the swap flow end-to-end.
`caribic demo message-exchange` now runs directly against the native `cosmos/entrypoint` chain and uses the built-in datasource at `cosmos/entrypoint/datasource` (no separate demo chain bootstrap required).

Both demo flows wait for Mithril stake distributions + cardano-transactions artifacts before IBC setup.  
If your machine is slower, tune retry windows in `~/.caribic/config.json`.

Operator-facing retry/timeout tuning is configurable in one place: `~/.caribic/config.json`.
For example:

```json
{
  "health": {
    "cosmos_max_retries": 60,
    "cosmos_retry_interval_ms": 10000,
    "gateway_max_retries": 180,
    "gateway_retry_interval_ms": 2000
  },
  "demo": {
    "mithril_artifact_max_retries": 240,
    "mithril_artifact_retry_delay_secs": 5,
    "message_exchange": {
      "consolidated_report_max_retries": 40,
      "consolidated_report_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "channel_discovery_max_retries": 20,
      "channel_discovery_max_retries_after_create": 120,
      "channel_discovery_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "connection_discovery_max_retries": 20,
      "connection_discovery_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "mithril_readiness_progress_interval_secs": 30,
      "relay_max_retries": 20,
      "relay_retry_delay_secs": 3
    }
  }
}
```

These values are read directly from `~/.caribic/config.json` (no environment-variable override).
If a required key is missing or set to `0`, caribic now fails fast with an explicit config error.

## `caribic test`

Runs end-to-end integration tests that validate the bridge plumbing from the outside, using Hermes to drive the gRPC Gateway and verifying on-chain effects via the Cardano handler state root. The general workflow to run the tests would be 

```bash 
cd caribic && cargo install --path . --force && cd .. && caribic check && caribic install && caribic start --clean --with-mithril
```

then wait for services to boot up, then 

```bash
caribic health-check
```

to make sure all the services are healthy, then 

```bash
  caribic test
  ```

### What it tests

The test suite is ordered and will **skip** later tests if prerequisites are not met (for example if no channel exists, or if a known limitation is hit).

- **Test 1**: validates required services are running (Cardano, Gateway container, Cosmos entrypoint RPC, Mithril endpoints and readiness checks)
- **Test 2**: runs the Hermes-native `health-check` to confirm Hermes can connect to the Gateway gRPC endpoint and query latest height
- **Test 3**: reads the handler UTXO and validates an `ibc_state_root` exists and looks sane
- **Test 4**: `createClient` via Hermes -> Gateway -> Cardano, then checks the `ibc_state_root` changes
- **Test 5**: queries client state back via Hermes, may skip if the Gateway requires an explicit height parameter
- **Test 6**: updates the client with new Tendermint headers, may skip if there are no new blocks or if height handling is required
- **Test 7**: creates an IBC connection, may skip if the Cosmos-side Cardano light client pieces are not available yet
- **Test 8**: creates an ICS-20 transfer channel, depends on Test 7 establishing a connection
- **Test 9**: ICS-20 transfer from the entrypoint chain to Cardano, relays packets, verifies voucher minting and `ibc_state_root` changes, and captures voucher identity for later checks
- **Test 10**: round-trip of that voucher back to the entrypoint chain, verifies voucher burn and denom-trace reverse lookup still succeeds
- **Test 11**: ICS-20 transfer of Cardano native `lovelace` to the entrypoint chain (Cardano escrows, Cosmos mints voucher), verifies denom-trace reverse lookup
- **Test 12**: round-trip of that voucher back to Cardano (burn + unescrow), verifies `ibc_state_root` changes and balance recovery within a fee budget

### Troubleshooting tips

- The command prints a summary of passed/skipped/failed tests at the end.
- If Test 2 fails, the suite aborts early because the remaining tests depend on Hermes talking to the Gateway.
- Hermes daemon logs are typically written under `~/.hermes/` (see `caribic start` output for the exact log path).
- If you are debugging flakes, rerun with higher verbosity:

```bash
caribic --verbose 5 test
```

Commit message:

caribic: default to repo config file with legacy fallback

caribic/README.md, after:

# Caribic

`caribic` is a local CLI used to bootstrap, run, and validate the Cardano <-> IBC bridge demo environment in this repo. For those familiar with Hermes, caribic cli also wraps that interface with equivalent commands that allow manual interaction with the relayer. The expected workflow is that keys would be addded to hermes via caribic, i.e, either you can enter via I/O when prompted, or refer to a mnemonic file as prompted, but there is no need to manually configure hermes. 

## Build and run

From `cardano-ibc-incubator/caribic`:

```bash
cargo install --path .
```
## Commands overview

### `caribic check`

Verifies prerequisites are available (Docker, Aiken, Deno, Go).

### `caribic install`

Installs missing prerequisites on macOS and Ubuntu Linux.

```bash
caribic install
```

### `caribic start [target]`

Starts services. Run `caribic --help` to see an actively maintained exhaustive list of targets and commands.

Examples:

```bash
caribic start
caribic start --clean --with-mithril
caribic start bridge
caribic start cosmos --clean
caribic start osmosis
caribic start injective --network local
caribic start injective --network testnet
```

Injective startup note:
- `caribic start injective --network local` starts a local single-node Injective devnet.
- `caribic start injective --network testnet` starts a local `injectived` process that state-syncs from public testnet RPC.
- `caribic start injective --network mainnet` is intentionally not implemented yet.
- If `injectived` is missing, caribic prompts to install it from source (`InjectiveFoundation/injective-core`) and runs `make install`.

Cosmos startup note:
- `caribic start cosmos` sets `IGNITE_SKIP_PROTO=1` by default in the container startup path to avoid Ignite regenerating OpenAPI/proto artifacts on every boot.
- If you intentionally need Ignite proto regeneration, run with `IGNITE_SKIP_PROTO=0 caribic start cosmos --clean`.

Hermes config note:
- Hermes reads `~/.hermes/config.toml` when the process starts. Editing that file while Hermes is already running does not apply live.
- If you change Hermes config manually, restart Hermes (`caribic stop relayer` then `caribic start relayer`).
- `caribic` writes Hermes config during setup and, for `caribic demo token-swap`, augments it with the `localosmosis` chain block before Hermes is used for channel creation.

### `caribic stop [target]`

Stops services. With no target, it behaves like `all`.

- **Targets**: `all`, `network`, `bridge`, `cosmos`, `osmosis`, `injective`, `demo`, `gateway`, `relayer`, `mithril`

Examples:

```bash
caribic stop
caribic stop bridge
caribic stop osmosis
caribic stop injective --network local
caribic stop injective --network testnet
```

### `caribic health-check [--service <name>]`

Checks whether key services appear to be up (gateway, cardano, postgres, kupo, ogmios, hermes, mithril, cosmos, osmosis, redis, plus optional chain adapter checks such as Injective). Use this before running tests if you are unsure about your current state.

```bash
caribic health-check
caribic health-check --service gateway
```

### `caribic audit`

Runs three checks and reports a single pass or fail summary:
- `npm audit` in `cardano/gateway`
- `cargo audit` in `caribic`
- `aiken check` in `cardano/onchain`

### `caribic keys <add|list|delete>`

Convenience wrapper around Hermes keyring operations.

```bash
caribic keys list
caribic keys add --chain entrypoint --mnemonic-file ./my-mnemonic.txt --overwrite
caribic keys delete --chain entrypoint --key-name relayer
```

### `caribic create-client`, `caribic create-connection`, `caribic create-channel`

Thin wrappers that run the corresponding Hermes IBC actions using the local Hermes binary/config.

```bash
caribic create-client --host-chain cardano-devnet --reference-chain entrypoint
caribic create-connection --a-chain cardano-devnet --b-chain entrypoint
caribic create-channel --a-chain cardano-devnet --b-chain entrypoint --a-port transfer --b-port transfer
```

### `caribic demo <message-exchange|token-swap>`

Starts a demo setup step on top of already running services.
`caribic demo token-swap` accepts optional chain/network selection:

```bash
caribic demo token-swap --chain osmosis --network local
caribic demo token-swap --chain osmosis --network testnet
caribic demo token-swap --chain injective --network testnet
```

Currently implemented token-swap path:
- `--chain osmosis --network local`

Other chain/network combinations are parsed and validated but return a clear "not implemented" error for now.

The implemented Osmosis local flow expects `caribic start --with-mithril` and `caribic start osmosis` to have already been run. It then validates required services, prepares Hermes channels, deploys the cross-chain swap contracts, and executes the swap flow end-to-end.
`caribic demo message-exchange` now runs directly against the native `cosmos/entrypoint` chain and uses the built-in datasource at `cosmos/entrypoint/datasource` (no separate demo chain bootstrap required).

Both demo flows wait for Mithril stake distributions + cardano-transactions artifacts before IBC setup.  
If your machine is slower, tune retry windows in `caribic/config/default-config.json` (or whichever file you pass via `--config`).

Operator-facing retry/timeout tuning is configurable in one place: `caribic/config/default-config.json` by default.
For example:

```json
{
  "health": {
    "cosmos_max_retries": 60,
    "cosmos_retry_interval_ms": 10000,
    "gateway_max_retries": 180,
    "gateway_retry_interval_ms": 2000
  },
  "demo": {
    "mithril_artifact_max_retries": 240,
    "mithril_artifact_retry_delay_secs": 5,
    "message_exchange": {
      "consolidated_report_max_retries": 40,
      "consolidated_report_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "channel_discovery_max_retries": 20,
      "channel_discovery_max_retries_after_create": 120,
      "channel_discovery_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "connection_discovery_max_retries": 20,
      "connection_discovery_retry_delay_secs": 3,
      "mithril_readiness_progress_interval_secs": 30,
      "relay_max_retries": 20,
      "relay_retry_delay_secs": 3
    }
  }
}
```

These values are read directly from the selected config file (default: `caribic/config/default-config.json`; legacy fallback: `~/.caribic/config.json`).
If a required key is missing or set to `0`, caribic now fails fast with an explicit config error.

## `caribic test`

Runs end-to-end integration tests that validate the bridge plumbing from the outside, using Hermes to drive the gRPC Gateway and verifying on-chain effects via the Cardano handler state root. The general workflow to run the tests would be 

```bash 
cd caribic && cargo install --path . --force && cd .. && caribic check && caribic install && caribic start --clean --with-mithril
```

then wait for services to boot up, then 

```bash
caribic health-check
```

to make sure all the services are healthy, then 

```bash
  caribic test
  ```

### What it tests

The test suite is ordered and will **skip** later tests if prerequisites are not met (for example if no channel exists, or if a known limitation is hit).

- **Test 1**: validates required services are running (Cardano, Gateway container, Cosmos entrypoint RPC, Mithril endpoints and readiness checks)
- **Test 2**: runs the Hermes-native `health-check` to confirm Hermes can connect to the Gateway gRPC endpoint and query latest height
- **Test 3**: reads the handler UTXO and validates an `ibc_state_root` exists and looks sane
- **Test 4**: `createClient` via Hermes -> Gateway -> Cardano, then checks the `ibc_state_root` changes
- **Test 5**: queries client state back via Hermes, may skip if the Gateway requires an explicit height parameter
- **Test 6**: updates the client with new Tendermint headers, may skip if there are no new blocks or if height handling is required
- **Test 7**: creates an IBC connection, may skip if the Cosmos-side Cardano light client pieces are not available yet
- **Test 8**: creates an ICS-20 transfer channel, depends on Test 7 establishing a connection
- **Test 9**: ICS-20 transfer from the entrypoint chain to Cardano, relays packets, verifies voucher minting and `ibc_state_root` changes, and captures voucher identity for later checks
- **Test 10**: round-trip of that voucher back to the entrypoint chain, verifies voucher burn and denom-trace reverse lookup still succeeds
- **Test 11**: ICS-20 transfer of Cardano native `lovelace` to the entrypoint chain (Cardano escrows, Cosmos mints voucher), verifies denom-trace reverse lookup
- **Test 12**: round-trip of that voucher back to Cardano (burn + unescrow), verifies `ibc_state_root` changes and balance recovery within a fee budget

### Troubleshooting tips

- The command prints a summary of passed/skipped/failed tests at the end.
- If Test 2 fails, the suite aborts early because the remaining tests depend on Hermes talking to the Gateway.
- Hermes daemon logs are typically written under `~/.hermes/` (see `caribic start` output for the exact log path).
- If you are debugging flakes, rerun with higher verbosity:

```bash
caribic --verbose 5 test
```
